---
layout: post
title: "Pontryagin, Euler, and Chern classes"
categories: [Differential Geometry]
mathjax: true
published: false
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Last time we finished with a quite general description of  <a href="https://anthonymakela.com/differential%20geometry/2023/12/28/characteristic-classes.html" style="color:#680530; text-decoration: underline;">Characteristic Classes</a>. In particular we gave a construction for the Chern–Weil homomorphism $c_E : \mathrm{Inv}(\mathfrak{gl}(n,\Bbb R)) \to H^\ast(M)$. The goal today is to look at different types of characteristic classes. We'll begin with Pontryagin classes and look at Euler and Chern classes afterwards.

<!--more-->

Recall that the algebra $\mathrm{Inv}(\mathfrak{gl}(n,\Bbb R))$ is generated by the coefficients $f_k(A)$ of the characteristic polynomials and by the trace polynomials $\operatorname{tr}(A^k)$. To determine all characteristic classes of a vector bundle $E \to M$, it is sufficient to compute the characteristic classes associated with either of these sets of polynomials. The characteristic classes we obtain from the polynomials $f_k(A)$ are called <b>Pontryagin Classes</b>.

---

Before diving into Pontryagin classes, let's try to figure out when characteristic classes vanish. I'll first remind you that whenever the bundle $E \to M$ is equipped with a Riemannian metric compatible with a connection $\nabla$, the curvature matrix $\Omega = [\Omega^i_j]$ relative to a local <i>orthonormal</i> frame $(e_i)$ over $U \subset M$ is skew-symmetric. Why is this? The second structural equation relates $\Omega$ to the connection matrix $\omega$ via $\Omega^i_j = d\omega^i_j + \omega^j_k \wedge \omega^k_i$. It would be therefore sufficient to show that $\omega = [\omega^i_j]$ is skew-symmetric as this would imply

$$
\begin{align*}
\Omega^i_j &= d\omega^i_j + \omega^i_k \wedge \omega^k_j \\
&= -d\omega^j_i + \omega^k_i \wedge \omega^j_k \\
&= -d\omega^i_j - \omega^j_k \wedge \omega^k_i \\
&= -\Omega^j_i.
\end{align*}
$$

To show that $\omega$ is skew-symmetric we'll use the compatibility of $\nabla$ with the metric. For any $X \in \Gamma(U, E)$ we have that

$$
\begin{align*}
0 &= X\langle e_i,e_j\rangle \\
&= \langle\nabla_X e_i, e_j\rangle +\langle e_i, \nabla_X e_j \rangle \\
&= \langle \omega^k_i(X)e_k, e_j\rangle + \langle e_i, \omega^k_j(X)e_k \rangle \\
&= \omega^j_i(X) + \omega^i_j(X)
\end{align*}
$$

which yields that $\omega^i_j = -\omega^j_i$ and therefore the skew-symmetry of $\Omega$. Okay, so we've shown that $\Omega$ is a skew-symmetric matrix, what does this have to do with vanishing characteristic classes? Well, notice that we now have

$$
\begin{align*}
f_1(\Omega) &= \operatorname{tr}(\Omega) \\
&= \operatorname{tr} \begin{pmatrix} 
    0 & \dots  & \Omega^1_n\\
    \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\
    -\Omega^n_1 & \dots  & 0
    \end{pmatrix} \\
    &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

and so $[f_1(\Omega)] = [\operatorname{tr}(\Omega)] = 0$. It would be reasonable to ask, whether this happens for all odd $k$? Turns out that this holds. We will need the following lemma for the proof.

<div class="lemma">
If $A$ is a skew-symmetric matrix of $2$-forms on $M$, then $A^k$ is symmetric for even $k$ and skew-symmetric for odd $k$.
</div>

The proof of the above lemma is a simple induction and will be left for the reader as an exercise. Using this we can conclude that $\Omega^k$ is skew-symmetric for odd $k$. You might have noticed that we have been assuming orthonormality of the frame and the compatibility of the connection with the metric in the above calculations. Neither of these will be a problem for us, since $\operatorname{tr}(\Omega^k)$ is invariant under conjugation and the cohomology class $[\operatorname{tr}(\Omega^k)]$ is independent of the connection. It is actually quite nice that we are able to use the Levi-Civita connection for example to calculate characteristic classes.

<div class="theorem">
Suppose that a homogeneous invariant polynomial $P(A)$ on $\mathfrak{gl}(n,\Bbb R)$ has odd degree $k$, then for any connection $\nabla$ on any vector bundle $E \to M$ with curvature matrix $\Omega$, the cohomology class $[P(\Omega)]$ is zero in $H^{2k}(M)$.
</div>

<div class="proof">
Equip $E$ with a Riemannian metric and let $\widetilde{\nabla}$ be the Levi-Civita connection on $E$, with curvature matrix $\widetilde{\Omega}$ on a framed open set. Since $P(A)$ is a linear combination with real coefficients in the trace polynomials and $k$ is odd, every monomial term of $P(A)$ has odd degree i.e. must contain a trace polynomial $\Sigma_m$ of odd degree $m$ as a factor. Since $\Sigma_m(\widetilde{\Omega}) = 0$ implies $P(\widetilde{\Omega}) = 0$ for the trace polynomials with odd degrees, we conclude using the independence of the connection that if $\nabla$ is any connection on $E$ with curvature matrix $\Omega$, then $[P(\Omega)] = [P(\widetilde{\Omega}) ] = 0$.
</div>

---

From the theorem above we concluded that for odd $k$, the polynomials $\Sigma_k(\Omega)$ and $f_k(\Omega)$ are all zero. This tells us that the ring of characteristic classes of $E$ is generated by

<ol>
    <li>
    The trace polynomials of even degrees
    $$
    [\Sigma_2(\Omega)],[\Sigma_4(\Omega)], [\Sigma_6(\Omega)], \dots
    $$
    </li>
<li>
    The coefficients of the characteristic polynomial $\det(\lambda I + \Omega)$ of even degrees
    $$
    [f_2(\Omega)],[f_4(\Omega)], [f_6(\Omega)], \dots
    $$
    </li>    
</ol>

Using these we will get the following definition.

<div class="definition">
The $k$'th Pontryagin class $p_k(E)$ of a vector bundle $E \to M$ is defined to be
$$
p_k(E) = \left[f_{2k}\left(\frac{i}{2\pi}\Omega\right)\right] \in H^{4k}(M).
$$
</div>

The factor of $i$ is there to make sure that other formulas will be sign-free and the factor of $1/2\pi$ is there to ensure that $p_k(E)$ is the class of an integral form[^1].

Note that we can collect the Pontryagin classes in a single formula given by

$$
\begin{align*}
    \left[\det\left(\lambda I + \frac{i}{2\pi} \Omega\right)\right] &= \lambda^n + p_1(E)\lambda^{n-1} + \dots + p_{\lfloor n/2\rfloor}(E)\lambda^{n-2\lfloor n/2\rfloor}
\end{align*}
$$

where $n$ is the rank of $E$. Using this we'll define the <b>total Pontryagin class</b> by setting $\lambda = 1$ to get

$$
p(E) := \left[\det\left(I + \frac{i}{2\pi} \Omega\right)\right] = 1 + p_1(E) + \dots + p_{\lfloor n/2\rfloor}(E).
$$



---

[^1]: A closed $p$-form is said to be <b>integral</b> if it results in an integer when integrated over any compact oriented submanifold of $M$ with dimension $p$.